---
title: 'Blockchain and Society'
excerpt: "There are studies that are trying to map an impact of blockchain on society already. Most of them focus on the transaction and governance abilities and while these are important, I think that there are some socio-economic implications missing and I'd like to address them in this article."
coverImage: 'https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1505682614136-0a12f9f7beea?ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHx8&ixlib=rb-1.2.1&auto=format&fit=crop&w=1200&&q=80'
date: '2021-06-16T05:35:07.322Z'
author:
  name: Adam Sobotka
  picture: '/assets/blog/authors/adam.jpeg'
ogImage:
  url: 'https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1505682614136-0a12f9f7beea?ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHx8&ixlib=rb-1.2.1&auto=format&fit=crop&w=1200&w=627&q=80'
---

There are studies, like [this one](https://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/id/eprint/10043048/1/Aste_BlockchainIEEE_600W_v3.3_A.doccceptedVersion.x.pdf), that are trying to map an impact of blockchain on the society already. Most of them focus on the transaction and governance abilities and while these are important, I think that there are some socio-economic implications missing and I'd like to address them in this article.

Most important aspects I consider missing are distribution of wealth and related distribution of power. I think that both are intertwined and symptomatic of both is that they don't fit well into "world is simply better with blockchain" simplification. My goal is not to dismiss the positive impact of technology on our lives though, if you look for another Manifesto, you will have to look elsewhere.



## Distribution of wealth

If you study sociology, you know that a big part of society's function revolves around the way we structure the society and the structure of society is mostly driven by wealth. Even in societies that put a different structure in place of wealth and they try to create a "better world" by building society on top of religious or other structures, wealth creeps in as a result of power. But let's focus on wealth itself.

In most of societies today, no matter how they label themselves, we see an increasing gap distribution of wealth towards the people that are already wealthy. I am the wrong person to explain this, but the core of the function is simple: if you can spend the money to invest, you jump off the deadly spiral that our governments are creating for a very good reason. Spiral is called inflation and if you are lucky enough to invest into the assets that do not decrease in value, your wealth is slowly but surely increasing. More you have, more you can invest and this create these big gaps we see in the current wealth distribution. I'll return to the reasons why the governments are doing this later and you will be surprised how well it fits into proverb "The road to hell is paved with good intentions".

But here comes blockchain, as a technology that can create artificial limited resources. Or artificial resources in general. It is not a new concept though, bonds and shares are very similar and while their value was bound originally to something more tangible, like company performance, now they are very similar to cryptocurrencies in a way their value is perceived. The concept that is new in this scale is a volatility and rapid increase of value over time. This opens a door to increased wealth of some social groups that wouldn't profit from investment in the shares in a short to medium term. There is the new upper middle class born from the blockchain technology and the size of this group is rising with every major shift of the cryptocurrencies valuation against fiat currencies. There are people losing money too, but their impact on society is minimal. I don't see any major group moving from the middle class lower because of some lost savings or similar.

This is joined by people that are already wealthy, they would never miss the chance to increase their wealth and the question of those moving majority of assets to blockchain based assets is not if, but when. For sake of simplicity, I'd group institutional money with wealthy people's money as they act very similarly. So what we see is two groups moving in the direction of increased wealth. While the "already wealthy" group remains roughly the same in size, the new upper class do have an impact on existing wealth distribution and thus impact on society.

What would be the impact? This very much depends on where you are on the ladder now. The option to have a whole bitcoin is moving away from a significant part of the population, no matter the peaks and "dips". In some parts of the world, it is already a very hard goal to reach. For another big chunk of the world, 100k USD/BTC price would be this breaking point. For people that cannot get the significant amount of BTC now the impact depends on their situation. 
Here, the government part. If you are a young person, especially a family, you either have a substantial debt already or you will create one in order to get the properties associated with some social norm. This is happening across the world and this is an engine of economic growth and motivation. People in debt generally profit from inflation, their debt is getting smaller and the money they are earning is getting higher. As I mentioned earlier, governments use inflation in order to achieve exactly this effect. This all is paid by the "savers". Companies and governments developed a great number of strategies they use to incentivize people to keep money in various forms of saving accounts. It could be called risk insurance, life insurance, investment bank accounts - you name it. Common denominator here is that you are supposed to "earn money" by saving. Some state sponsored and mandatory savings works the same way and you can hate it as much as you can, but you are putting your money into these systems. And the older or more wealthy you are, the more you help the young indebted people. Which is nice. 
Until the older and more wealthy have an option to get part of wealth out of this cycle. At the moment the significant part of this group decides to move the assets to shares or cryptocurrencies or NFTs or basically anything outside of the system, the cycle as described above, collapses. The loans are continually created from thin air and new money is "created" in order to cover for the assets that disappeared from the system. Which spins the inflation spiral even further, making indebted people super happy and people with "savings" super angry and looking for an option to escape the system.
 
Aside from hyperinflation, there will be another impact on society, perhaps even harder to recognize. Current economic system creates a very wealthy group of people - they simply don't have the means to spread the wealth to the rest of the society (as the gap is huge) and their impact on the market is not big. Yes, there is a specific market that thrives because of this group, but from the impact perspective, luxury yacht is just an overpriced yacht with some nice small improvements. The existence of luxury goods does not endanger anything from economical, ecological or society perspective. Niche is too small and the gap too wide.
But, consider a growing group of people that can reach the same market. Yes, this market will be super expensive for most people who invest in blockchain based assets - but not essentially unreachable. As the civilization progress, we see a similar thing in regular market: amount of people buying very expensive smartphones could be a great example. Now scale that example ten times and you will see the size of the problem we are running into. The very pioneers of the blockchain investment are known for "Lambo" memes, but they are not memes anymore. Only limited amount of people reached a financial freedom, but the number of people who used the gains to pay for luxury cars, vacations, TV sets and similar is rising rapidly. If the trend continue and we will see another multiplications of value in blockchain assets, we will have a group of people that can afford things that were meant for way more limited population. What I am saying is that 1/99% we know from Occupy movement is becoming 2/10/78% and we have no idea how to handle the 10% in the middle.
And it is not just luxury goods I am talking about. This group will sweep through the real estate market too. And I don't know what else. There will be impact on the market, on the ecology, on the society. What I was able to describe could be just a tip of an iceberg.
 
 
## Distribution of power
 
More optimistic, in my opinion, is a shift in power. We know how our society works, the system called bankocracy basically replaced parts of the democratic society where the public control can endanger the control big capital needs to oversee (to keep the status quo). I am not a revolutionary, I am afraid that this is a natural outcome of the capitalism/democracy mixture and you can see that there are worse attempts on how to handle things (like the capitalism/tyranny model we can see in some parts of the world). The status quo results in a stable society where hunger is slowly disappearing and technological advancement is not slowed down. This all works fine not only for the current top 1% but also for governments and it is not bad for a regular person (despite the facts stated above). But the middle 10% group is not going to stay silent. As wealth and power are very much bound to each other, we will have to figure out the society that works for this group too.
 
A dangerous path, already visible in some governments, is to harass the new group and try to eliminate the opportunities for the citizens to become part of this group. Some countries tries to openly discriminate the blockchain based assets, some work in less visible ways. While it is clear why they do this, it is fortunately too late. These attempts are similar to the moment we know from history: there was an attempt to remove academic institutions from the early internet and restore the network as an army controlled environment. It didn't succeed because the idea was more important than the technological background - it became clear very fast that academic institutions will build a different network working on the same principles. So the governments will try to introduce new taxes, they will ban the exchanges and they will do all they can until a new balance of power will be established. But it will and it is inevitable.
 
Which points to a less dangerous path - finding a common ground. Bankocracy has in the end a lot of interests in common with the 10% group. We all want a more transparent government. We want a better education system. The technologies used for blockchain assets can make the world a better place. The struggle that is coming is about making it a better place for everyone. We can't make progress in education for 11% of the population and the current 1% knows that. In a moment the rising 10% group will make the chances of the 78% of population even lower, we are asking for the same troubles that started nationalism, communism and other ideas with millions of dead people behind them. One of the main problems we will need to address as a society is how to enable the young people to start their own, independent life. We can't rely on the "savings” anymore, but they need support to start their life without the government simply printing money for them. Same with anyone else who needs to raise money - entrepreneurs, start-ups and so on. There is the opportunity for a new financial system, like peer-lending and similar principles. Those can use the blockchain technology, but that means some level of understanding from current power holders and some change of their perspective.
 
As you can see, I am not the best at solving the problems that are coming. I presented some ideas, but the reason why I wrote this piece is to open the discussion I consider missing in our society. It might be even a little ahead of time, this happens to me often. But I would be surprised if the whole problem magically disappears and we will be living happily in the same society we have now in ten years.
